# Developmental-Analysis-of-EV-Charging-Stations-in-

This study delves into the electric vehicle (EV) transportation systems within the city of Toronto with a particular emphasis on addressing congestion at charging stations. The central objective is to comprehensively examine the intricacies of charging station congestion for electric buses and its repercussions on the sustainability of urban transportation. The approach involves generating visual models that highlight anomalies in the study's variables. Employing advanced Geographic Information System (GIS) techniques, data analytics, and multi-dimensional modelling, the project explores the influence of various factors on charging station wait times and the lifespan of EV batteries. The aim is to highlight external elements affecting the development and adaptability of EV infrastructure in Toronto, thereby impacting the existing transportation system. By analyzing factors such as charging station congestion and EV vehicle density, the research seeks to provide insights into enhancing charging availability, promoting EV awareness, and assessing strategies for improving charging infrastructure and locations. In collaboration with Solv4x's ongoing project with Metrolinx, this project contributes to the development of a strategic framework. The findings aim to assist Solv4x and other stakeholders in the industry by elucidating how specific isolated variables intersect to influence the efficiency and integration of EVs in Toronto. Visualizations such as heat change maps, weighted models, choropleth, and other available models will be utilized to analyze variables such as EV charging station density, distribution of EVs, traffic congestion, and environmental temperatures. Moreover, the study will acknowledge limitations such as missing data, which may impact the findings; despite these limitations, the study provides a foundation for understanding and addressing the current charging station congestion in Toronto.<br />
Keywords: electric vehicle, charging stations, congestion, transportation, Toronto <br />
<br />


## Background Research<br />

Cities around the world are making shifts from traditional diesel-fueled vehicles to zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs), vehicles that run primarily on renewable sources like electricity or hydrogen. According to the World Resources Institute, several countries like Norway (80%), Iceland (41%), Sweden (32%), the Netherlands (24%) and China (22%) have the highest percentages of EV sales from all passenger vehicles sold in 2022 (Jaeger, 2023). Some countries in particular are not only supporting the transition of diesel to electric vehicles for light-duty vehicles like passenger cars but also are implementing initiatives to promote emission-free public transportation systems to further reduce the harmful emissions of the transport system. For example, Reykjavik, Iceland plans to introduce more hydrogen buses and triple public transport usage by 2030 according to Reykjavik’s City Municipal Plan. According to the Government of Canada, "the transportation sector accounts for 25% of Canada's greenhouse gas emissions" and making the shift to zero-emission alternatives is a crucial step for significantly reducing harmful emissions (Infrastructure Canada). In this global context, Canada has actively joined the movement by proposing new regulations in December 2022, which mandate all new light-duty vehicles sold by 2035 must be ZEVs (Government of Canada, 2022). Light-duty refers to vehicles such as passenger cars, SUVs and small trucks (Government of Canada). According to the government, light-duty vehicles like these account for almost half of Canada's transportation emissions and setting this target for 2035 makes the future of Canada having net-zero emissions by 2050 possible (Government of Canada). Starting in 2026, companies are expected to transition to selling more electric vehicles by slowly increasing the percentage of ZEVs they sell, starting at 20% of all vehicles sold in 2026 (Government of Canada). Each year onwards, the percentage would “increase annually to at least 60 percent by 2030 and 100 percent for 2035” (Government of Canada). By 2035, all new vehicles sold would be ZEVs. However, gas and diesel vehicles can still be driven and bought as used vehicles after 2035 (Government of Canada). The government explains that when you consider the average vehicle has a life of 15 years, putting this target of “100% ZEV sales by 2035” means Canada can eliminate the “use of these polluting vehicles by 2050” (Government of Canada).<br />

Canada further emphasizes its dedication through initiatives like the $2.75 billion Zero Emission Transit Fund, which aims to support public transit and school bus operators nationwide in electrifying their fleets (Infrastructure Canada). These commitments aim to support the transition to cleaner transportation alternatives and align with international efforts to reduce carbon emissions. As the first step in creating a more sustainable transportation landscape, Metrolinx, the Government of Ontario-founded agency coordinating public transportation in the Greater Toronto Area, has initiated the transition of electrifying its GO bus fleet (Metrolinx, 2023). Recently, they just moved on to the next phase of their testing trials in May 2023. They are actively testing their electric vehicle (EV) technology on the road using two EV GO buses that are being used by real public riders on routes 19, 27, 92, and 96B (Metrolinx). To support this transition, Metrolinx has partnered with Solv4x, a technology start-up specializing in creating artificial intelligence-powered Software as a Service (SaaS) solutions for electric vehicle fleet and charging infrastructure management. As students working under the guidance of Solv4x's founder and CEO, Rekha Sharma, our project aims to supplement the ongoing work between Solv4x and Metrolinx as they work to create a software solution that will allow Metrolinx and possibly other similar transportation projects around the world to efficiently track and manage their electric vehicles and charging stations infrastructure models.<br />

## Current Issues with Electric Vehicles<br />
Although there is now a large movement of interest in EVs, there are still many issues barring the transition of society from choosing the fully electric model. Driving range and battery charging efficiency are lacking in comparison to its gasoline-powered counterparts. There are also big issues with the End of Life environmental impact. These lithium batteries are very hard to process once they are disposed of and require extensive processing to be converted into waste. Hence, the more upscale transitions to EVs will produce higher amounts of waste. Since one car can cycle through an indefinite amount of batteries, this raises the question of how to deal with and process the enormous quantities of batteries efficiently and safely. A study in Thailand finds that the reasons people are buying EVs are primarily because of performance efficiency and environmental concerns. The study findings say that companies should be worried more about battery efficiency, and all influencing variables, as a way to incentivize people into purchasing more EVs. The final and more predominant issue is the issue of big data. Many studies state that in recent years EVs have been a major focus of development. However, one issue is the numerous variables that can alter an EV’s battery life performance. Current models are inefficient as they lack the capability to incorporate all the variables that can affect EV battery life. For example, we were asked to specifically focus on traffic congestion and its effect on EV battery life, as more frequent and longer stops drain the battery faster, which in turn reduces the distance that an EV can drive until it needs recharging again. This is different from diesel vehicles as EVs use energy to move and constantly starting and stopping uses a lot of energy each time. As a result, new studies are being conducted to find more accurate ways to understand EV capabilities. As mentioned by Energy5, “a recent study conducted by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory” reveals that “electric cars can lose up to 63% of their range when driving in heavy traffic” (Energy5, 2023). This is why it is important to analyze how congestion on roads and more specifically, congestion in EV charging stations, can further drain EV batteries and which other factors further contribute and how they can be mitigated.<br />

## Sustainable Future with Electric Vehicles<br />
Electric vehicles have been in the limelight for their sustainable use and long-term benefits despite the current issues their industry is facing. To avoid relying on combustion engine vehicles which are contributing to emissions, high healthcare costs and regulatory market risks, EVs need to be highlighted more for their contribution to sustainability. For instance, the government of Canada offers a purchase incentive of up to $5,000 for electric vehicle purchases. In Québec, electric vehicles qualify for up to $8,000 in incentives. In British Columbia, they qualify for up to $5,000 in incentives'' (Plug 'N Drive).  This is because electric vehicles in the Canadian market promote a better quality of life for Canadian citizens, especially in metropolitan spots like the GTA. Similarly, Solv4x also primarily works in the electric vehicle market, which is why they are working with electric buses during their current partnership with Metrolinx. Firstly, with the use of electric vehicles, there could be a significant decrease in greenhouse emissions. According to the National Resources Defence Council, electrification reduces ground-level ozone, nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOC). These reductions can contribute to “a PEV today [having] 54 percent lower lifetime carbon pollution today. In 2050, the reduction could be larger, as much as 59 to 71 percent compared to a more efficient combustion vehicle (CV) that achieves 48 miles per gallon in real-world driving, depending on the electricity grid carbon intensity” (NDRC). This means that, traditionally, the use of CVs generates an excess amount of carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide which generally result in a lot of greenhouse emissions leading to poor air quality. As the National Resources Defence Council mentioned, with the idea of electrification, this issue can be tackled. Moreover, in comparison to CVs, EVs tend to reduce noise pollution as well since “they don’t have an internal combustion engine and therefore do not require as much power upon acceleration, EVs are not nearly as noisy as a gas-powered vehicle” (Nextridens). Reducing air and noise pollution will promote a better lifestyle for GTA residents. Lastly, it is financially easier to maintain electric vehicles than it is with combustion engine vehicles. Along with being cheaper “Electric buses and van units are also much easier to monitor. Onboard tech and software allow the e-bus manufacturer to track your system remotely so they can instantly flag a sudden loss in battery pack performance” (Cresline Buses). With a cheaper and environmentally friendly option for public transit, the citizens will benefit in the long run. Overall, electric vehicles in the GTA can contribute to local development which can ripple down to an overall global impact to promote a long ecological footprint.<br />

## Limitations<br />
We focused exclusively on Toronto for this project due to a lack of comprehensive data covering electric vehicles (EVs) and speed indices across the entire Greater Toronto Area (GTA). Obtaining such datasets for the GTA posed challenges, due to factors such as incomplete/missing records, the absence of relevant information and the privatization of certain data. Our decision to primarily use data for light-duty EVs (i.e. passenger cars) was because of a similar constraint since there was limited data available for EV buses due to issues such as the non-existence of such public transportation systems and/or privatization of such data. <br />

## Goals and Objectives <br />
### Problem & Goal <br />
The goal of this project is to identify the external factors that have impacts on the development and adaptability of EV infrastructure in the city of Toronto and its overall impact on the pre-existing transportation system. Analyzing factors such as charging station congestion and EV vehicle congestion will provide a pathway to comprehend how to improve charging availability, increase awareness regarding EVs, and assess ways to improve the charging infrastructures and locations. As a supplementary project to Solv4x's current project with Metrolinx, our work will aid them in creating their developmental strategy and further help general stakeholders in the industry. <br />
### Objectives <br />
The primary objective of the project is to discover how the battery life of electric vehicles (EVs) can be optimized within Toronto's transportation system by identifying and addressing environmental factors, with a specific focus on issues like charging station congestion and traffic wait times. We wish to contribute to the successful integration of electric buses into the public transportation system and support Solv4x’s current project with Metrolinx by doing the following:<br />
Charging Station Location and Density Analysis<br />
Electric Vehicle Ownership Density<br />
Resource Allocation Analysis<br />
Traffic Congestion Analysis (Buffer Time Indices)<br />
Temperature Impact Assessment<br />
Resource Allocation Strategies<br />
Infrastructure Development Recommendations<br />
## Methods <br />
Our project was divided into two main phases: Data Collection & Cleaning and Mapping & Analysis. During the first phase, the following data was collected, munged, and filtered from the following sources: Ontario EV charging stations collected from Natural Resources Canada’s Alternative Fuelling Stations Locator, Toronto Municipal Boundary from City of Toronto’s Open Dataset, Canada FSA boundaries from Statistics Canada’s 2021 Census Boundaries, Ontario EV ownership data from Government of Ontario’s Open Dataset, Landsat 8 Collection 2 Tier 2 TOA Reflectance satellite images from Google Earth Engine’s Landsat collections and Travel Speed data for Cars and Trucks from Ontario’s Ministry of Transportation. The data was cleaned primarily using ArcGIS Pro, Google Earth Engine and Excel. We used these tools to further isolate the attributes and spatial area that we wanted to focus on: Toronto. The boundary files proved useful for clipping our data and shortening the original datasets. During the next mapping & analysis phase, we created the following nine maps: EV charging station location map, EV charging station density map, EV Ownership Density by FSA mapped to locations of EV Stations, EV Charging Station Location Allocation Analysis map, Traffic Congestion Analysis maps (4 maps in total), and the Land Surface Temperature map of Toronto. All of the maps were created on ArcGIS Pro excluding the temperature map, which was created on Google Earth Engine using a Python script. We looked at individual charging station locations as well as comparing the densities of stations and recorded EV ownerships across Toronto. We further looked into how station hotspots, traffic wait times and temperature affected EV charging.<br />

Our focus in this project was the identification and visualization of the possible factors affecting the expansion and transition of global transportation systems to electric models. Hence, our deliverables consisted of two main components that were encompassed in the ArcGIS story map. One often overlooked feature in projects such as these is the flexibility and applicability of the model created in the conclusion of the project. We decided to use an example of a real-world example of a city to provide recommendations that could be widely applicable to a diverse range of transportation systems around the world. Lastly, an ArcGIS story map was created to portray findings with the expectation that it would allow users to interact with the data in the visualizations. This story map effectively communicated the goals and outcomes of our projects to readers, including stakeholders.<br />

## Conclusion & Recommendations<br />
In conclusion, there are a plethora of external environmental variables that can affect EV charging efficiency and in the end EV battery life. The key to the optimization of such a system is the handling of such variables, which have been highlighted in this report to create an efficient and effective system for transportation companies to work with. The variables we have measured are also quantifiable and can be compared yearly as indicators of whether or not a system is accommodating all the necessary factors for its benefits. A robust example of an electrified system would be Shenzhen, a city with a population of 12.5 million people in Southern China. It is the first megacity to achieve full electrification of its public transportation system, where the city operates the largest electric fleet in the world, with a whopping amount of 16,539 pure battery e-buses (Lin et al., 2019). However, as the infrastructure was expanding, and different systems were applied, Shenzhen faced a variety of problems. Issues such as power grid overload, the prerequisite of multilateral negotiation, and electromagnetic radiation started surfacing as valid constraints to the development of the new transportation network (Lin et al.). They also faced the constraint of land scarcity, which resulted in innovative solutions being implemented (Lin et al.). Specifically, large-scale, multi-floored bus charging, parking, and maintenance stations were designed and integrated into the city's infrastructure (Lin et al.). Shenzhen's strategies in achieving full electrification of its transportation system, particularly its design of large-scale, multi-floored charging and maintenance stations for electric buses, can serve as a robust model example for other urban centers and transport systems, including Metrolinx as they consider similar transitions for Toronto and other cities in the GTA.<br />

## References<br />
All-electric vehicles. Fuel Economy. (n.d.). https://fueleconomy.gov/feg/evtech.shtml
Analyzing the effects of traffic congestion on electric car electricity usage. (2023). Energy5. 
https://energy5.com/analyzing-the-effects-of-traffic-congestion-on-electric-car-electricity
-usage<br /><br />
City of Toronto. (2019). City of Toronto Electric Vehicle Strategy. 
https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/8c46-City-of-Toronto-Electric-
Vehicle-Strategy.pdf<br /><br />
Electric Car Benefits. (n.d.). Plug 'N Drive. https://www.plugndrive.ca/electric-vehicle-benefits‌
Electric Vehicles Can Dramatically Reduce Carbon Pollution. (n.d.). Natural Resources Defense 
Council. https://www.nrdc.org/bio/luke-tonachel/<br /><br />
Government of Canada. (2022, December). Proposed Regulated Sales Targets for Zero-Emission 
Vehicles. https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/news/2022/12/
Proposed-regulated-sales-targets-for-zero-emission-vehicles.html<br /><br />
How electric vehicles are benefiting the environment. Next Ride. 
	https://nextridens.com/blog/electric-vehicles-benefit-environment<br /><br />
Hydro-Québec. (n.d.). Electric vehicles: An eco-friendly choice from start to finish!.
https://www.hydroquebec.com/transportation-electrification/electric-vehicles/an-eco-friendly-choice.html<br /><br />
Infrastructure Canada. (2021, October 12). Zero emission transit fund. 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/zero-emissions-trans-zero-emissions/index-eng.html<br /><br />
Jaeger, J. (2023). These countries are adopting electric vehicles the fastest. 
https://www.wri.org/insights/countries-adopting-electric-vehicles-fastest<br /><br />
Kurdve, M., Zackrisson, M., Johansson, M. I., Ebin, B., & Harlin, U. (2019, April 15).  
Considerations when modelling EV battery circularity systems. MDPI. https://www.mdpi.com/2313-0105/5/2/40<br /><br />
Lin, Y., Zhang, K., Shen, Z-JM., & Miao, L. (2019). Charging Network Planning for Electric Bus 
Cities: A Case Study of Shenzhen, China. Sustainability, 11(17): 4713. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174713<br /><br />
Manutworakit, P., & Choocharukul, K. (2022, July 11). Factors influencing battery electric 
vehicle adoption in Thailand-expanding the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology’s variables. MDPI. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/14/14/8482
Metrolinx. (n.d.). About us. https://www.metrolinx.com/en/about-us<br /><br />
Metrolinx. (2023, May). EV Go Buses Charge Ahead in Next Phase of Trial. 
https://www.metrolinx.com/en/news/ev-go-buses-charge-ahead-in-next-phase-of-trial<br /><br />
Neighbourhood income toronto 2020. (n.d.). Retrieved November 29, 2023, from 
https://schoolofcities.github.io/neighbourhood-income-toronto-2020/<br /><br />
Plug N’ Drive. (2017). Driving EV Uptake in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area How 
Driver Perceptions Shape Electric Vehicle Ownership in the GTHA. 
https://www.plugndrive.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Driving-EV-Uptake-in-the-
Greater-Toronto-and-Hamilton-Area.pdf <br /><br />
Reykjavik city municipal plan | reykjavik. (n.d.). Retrieved November 23, 2023, from 
https://reykjavik.is/en/municipal-plan <br /><br />
Samsara. (2021, November 3). How Are Electric Vehicles Better for the Environment?.
https://www.samsara.com/guides/how-are-electric-vehicles-better-for-the-environment/<br /><br />
The most detailed income map of Toronto you’ve ever seen! (n.d.). Retrieved November 29, 
2023, from https://www.datalabto.ca/incomes/<br /><br />

## Appendix A: Map Data Sources<br />
Earth Engine Data Catalog. (2022). USGS Landsat 8 Collection 2 Tier 2 TOA Reflectance. 
Retrieved from https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/
LANDSAT_LC08_C02_T2_TOA<br /><br />
Government of Canada. (2021). 2021 census boundary files. https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-
recensement/2021/geo/sip-pis/boundary-limites/index2021-eng.cfm?Year=21<br /><br />
Government of Ontario. (2023). Electric vehicles in ontario – by forward sortation area—Ontario 
data catalogue. Retrieved November 1, 2023, from https://data.ontario.ca/dataset/electric-
vehicles-in-ontario-by-forward-sortation-area<br /><br />
Ontario electric charging stations / bornes de recharge électriques de l'Ontario. (2020). Retrieved 
November 1, 2023, from https://hub.arcgis.com/datasets/453df818a0844533bda269
e61bf94f7d_0/about<br /><br />
Ontario Ministry of Transportation. (2016). 2016 Travel Speed and Performance Measure (Car). 
Retrieved from https://icorridor-mto-on-ca.hub.arcgis.com/datasets/0575577257da
451f8b4b4097f910962e_0/about<br /><br />
Ontario Ministry of Transportation. (2019). 2019 Travel Speed and Performance Measure 
(Truck). Retrieved from https://icorridor-mto-on-ca.hub.arcgis.com/datasets/
71111ea2631c415492f5acd32fa6964d_0/about<br /><br />
Regional Municipal Boundary. (2019). Retrieved November 1, 2023, from 
https://open.toronto.ca/dataset/regional-municipal-boundary/<br /><br />

